---
title: "Competing forces of polarization and confinement generate cellular chirality in a minimal model"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-10-13-doublet
date: 2025-10-13
preprinturl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.11642'
venue: 'arxiv'
citation: 'Egun Im, Ghina Badih, Laetitia Kurzawa, Andreas Buttenschön, Calina Copos <i>arxiv</i> (2025)'
---

*Abstract:* Left-right axis specification is a vital part of embryonic development that
establishes the left and the right sides of an embryo. Asymmetric organ
morphogenesis follows asymmetric signaling cascades, which in turn follow
asymmetric events on the cellular scale. In a recent study, Badih et al.\
reported cell-scale movement asymmetries in spontaneously rotating pairs of
endothelial cells confined to a circular fibronectin-coated island.
Importantly, the authors demonstrate that cytoskeletal contractility
modulates the chirality bias. The relative simplicity of the experimental
setup make it a perfect testing ground for the physical forces that could
endow this system with rotational movement and biases, but these forces
have yet to be stated. We model self-propelling biological cells migrating
in response to confinement, polarity, and pairwise repulsive forces. For
the first time, we are able to reproduce not only the coherent angular
movement of a confined pair of cells biased in a direction but also
a contractility-modulated chirality bias. To arrive at these modeling
results, two key assumptions are needed: an intrinsic orientation bias
(previously observed in other cellular systems), and a difference between
the cells in their velocity alignment response, which endows the system
with a difference in the timescales of dynamics. Tuning the timescale (or
strength) of polarity response relative to the remaining forces
(confinement and cell-cell interaction), can amplify or reverse the CW
bias. We present a coherent theory, based on dynamical system analysis,
that captures chirality emergence in a singlet and doublet cell system.

[Download paper here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.11642)
